Jorge Nocedal, 'Nonlinear Optimization Methods for Machine Learning', Distinguished Seminar, Purdue Industrial Engineering, 2017-02-15 (uploaded 2017-02-22). https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=srg3Rx2HvfQ
Transcript: YouTube captions (uploader-provided English subtitle track), grouped into ~30 s blocks with start timestamps; not human-checked by this project. Retrieved 2026-09-28 by research agent 02 (stated methodology). Speaker quotes taken from this file are marked as caption-derived in ../../research/02-methodology.md.

[0:00:00] [MUSIC] [APPLAUSE] >> So thank you very much, good to see all of you here. I have not been here at Purdue for many years, so it's a pleasure to meet friends. And I hope that this talk is accessible to students. I'm gonna talk about optimization and machine learning, these two areas. I have worked mainly at developing methods, which can be kind of boring to describe. These are the algorithms we have developed. But twice in my career I have detours where I have worked on applications.
[0:00:35] I mean if you work in optimization people come to you all the time with their problems, right? And you can't deal with them. Twice I have led detours. In the 1990s, I worked on the current weather forecasting systems, the deviation and the simulation. And you don't know that but there's a non-linear optimization problem is driving the PD simulations. And then many years later started getting into machine learning problems, because a group at Google got me interested in about six years I was going in there once a month. And it took me a while to realize that these two applications actually were quite similar, in many ways.
[0:01:11] They were similar in the sense that they required a lot of data. But at that time in the 90s, nobody talked about big data, those big data. But the other thing is that the objectives were stochastic. There's a lot of noise in all of these observations, and there was something similar about them. But the way we approach the problems was quite different. Than in now, and this time I want to talk a little bit from the perspective of what I know about machine learning, and how optimization, which is one of the core disciplines in there. It's playing a role in maybe what open questions there are.
[0:01:45] Here are some of my collaborators, and some of the funding agencies. And I'll just say is a small side remark, I was at INTEL just a month ago talking to some of the architecture people there, and one of the bosses came by and he said, these days we're interested in five customers. INTEL used to be interested in millions of customers that sell to millions of customers. Now we're interested in five customers, and I'm saying what are those five customers? And they were saying well, Amazon Web Services, Google, Microsoft, whoever gets the architecture all for those chips, for
[0:02:21] those data centers, is gonna be serving the millions of people, and so on. And so we have a project that is related to the first part of the talk, which is optimization methods for deep neural networks. And there, in that particular case, they're interested in saying what is the most appropriate future architecture for doing deep neural networks, that would go beyond GPUs, which are currently used very extensively there. Okay, two parts of my talk. First, I'm gonna talk about what I found to be quite surprising observations
[0:02:56] about the optimization of deep neural networks. And in the second part, I'll talk about how you can solve big data problems with huge sizes in data using second-order method, not just simple. There is the idea that if the problem is so large, you can only use simple methods. I'm trying to motivate people to look at methods that are not like that. So why machine learning, lots of people in this room I'm sure are really interested in machine learning, know about machine learning, has had many successes. These are some the areas where it first began to have a lot of impact.
[0:03:32] What is important to us is that it turns out that this field of artificial intelligence relies heavily on statistics and optimization. Maybe that's what it is. Plus some powerful computing platforms are essential, very large data sets that have to be gathered, and expert feature selection. So 2009, when I first got a call from the person at that time in charge of speech at Google, and he called me up and said would you be interested in working with us. And he said well,
[0:04:05] here are three things that I can tell you that might interest you. One of them is, we're more data than anybody. Second, we have smarter people than anybody. And second we have more computing power than anybody. Does that sound they're interesting, right? And the part that I did not know was the part about the large data. At that time they were investing heavily in labeling acoustic frame so they could do speech recognition better. And, it was this is just before neural networks came, but they were already committed to working on that field. Now, because machine learning has been so
[0:04:39] successful, people now are emboldened, right, to look at many other domains. And material science can be learn about new materials by machine learning techniques and so on. So, this is very real, and there's also a lot of hype, right? Machine learning is gonna destroy I don't know how many, I don't think so. And so many professions and so on. Now, it's a matter of trying to find out what's hype, and what are the opportunities. This is a very interesting domain, spreading very much everywhere. I could not believe it, but I was speaking recently to an audience of Econometrics.
[0:05:16] In the past, you wouldn't like such techniques. I remember I asked people in the group, how many of you haven't seen machine running? And all the young people raised their hands. These people working on Econometrics, right? Are they really using it, are they having success? I don't know but they're at least they're interested in looking into that. So the major impact is still to be seen but is so recent that there is hope for that. So what is recent? Well, deep neural networks have revolutionized speech recognition, and made it a lot better.
[0:05:50] And this started in 2012 for the first results. So in a matter of five years, the whole field has changed drastically, to the point that conferences in speech recognition used to talk about certain topics, and then they moved entirely to talk about neural networks in a matter of two or three years, right? And this is the structure of how they are. I am assuming that all of you have seen what Neuronetwork is, right? But the essence is that you create a very highly nonlinear predictor functions. Which is contrary to what was being done in statistics,
[0:06:26] the simple is possible, right? Generalized linear moles, really powerful, they serve so well. Suddenly, the idea is to use a highly nonlinear predictor. What does that mean? Well, everyone of these units is a logistic unit. But you combine all these statistic units over and over. It's a composition, and so even if you don't have this sigmoidal function here, even if you just have a piecewise linear activation function, you will end up with a piecewise polynomial, and the unknowns of the problem which is the weights of the arcs.
[0:06:59] A piecewise polynomial of degree seven and say 10 million variables. And that's just too much for people in approximation theory to tell you to describe what this polynomial is. How many stationary points? How many global minima can you? Now, there is a lot of interesting trying to look at this now, but this is a very complicated thing. Now, neural networks they are deep, means that they may have seven of these layers here, they are very broad, right? There is a paper that came out, just a few months ago. It's called something like understanding generalization.
[0:07:35] We have to rethink generalization by these authors here. The observation that they make is that, we have created such huge neural networks, we have so much capacity that the number of unknowns, the number of parameters you can play with is bigger, actually, than the data that yo have. So it seems like an ill post problem, not it seems like it is an ill post problem. The question that they raise in this paper is is it the case that neural networks actually just memorizing. And you have two sets, the training set and the test set.
[0:08:13] But the training set It's already the same like it's a test set. So you have so much capacity that you've memorized. They don't solve anything. They don't prove anything. They just raise some questions. Then they make some really interesting experiments that make you think that maybe we just created this monster that can memorize really well. I'm sure this story's gonna end up to be more complicated, but if anybody wants, take a look at this paper here. All right, there are three main classes of neural networks. Feed forward, convolutional that are used for image recognition, and
[0:08:47] Recurrent Neural Networks that are very powerful. All of them have to be trained with optimization methods, we will discuss that. And so, in order to establish the notation of what is supervised training, how do you train a neural network? Let's establish the notation I think I'm going to follow very established nomenclature here. First of all, machine learning only works if you have a lot of data, right? You're gonna use data in order to understand what humans cannot do. For instance, speech recognition. So you gather a sizeable amount of data, n pieces of data, and
[0:09:24] each example consists of a feature vector, xi, and it's corresponding label, y. Our objective is to construct a prediction function that depends on some parameters. So the class of prediction functions have been. Predetermined, so you decided the prediction function is a neural network with seven layers and 2,000 nodes. You determined that beforehand. What is to be determined is the weights of the nodes by which all the information gets combined, like a recipe.
[0:09:58] So there is a prediction function h that depends on some parameters you are going to optimise 'w' and is such that when you put an input vector x, the prediction function will return a value that is close to the real value. So it should make a good prediction on data that it has not been seen. And how do you measure how well your predictions are? You create a loss function like these squares that is going to look the distance between your predictions and the real data that you have. So there is a loss function here for given training point x,
[0:10:34] i the correct label is y, i but your predictor gives a certain value. You look at that distance and then you have a measure of how well you have done thing. So very quickly what we did in here is we did the following. We gathered data, we thought about it constructing a prediction function, and then the lost function is just a measure but putting these three three things together we constructed an optimization algorithm. So the question now is How do we find the prediction function? Minimize the error on your training set.
[0:11:11] It's like least squares. It's like regression, but this is a very complicated form of regression. But it's pretty much what it is, right. Now the other difference is that it's classification. The results can only be in certain classes, it's not a continuous value. But the ideas are very simple. Optimization now has come to the point that the formulation of the problem is undeterminant, is variational. Loss functions that one can use Logistic regression is gonna be very useful in multi-class, logistic regression is used quite a bit in order to see how well your observations are.
[0:11:45] Why, let's look at a concrete example of machine running that is actually impressive, right? So, you talk to your phone, I don't know how often you guys talk to your phone, but the the air rate has been going down steadily, right? You talk to your phone, you create acoustic waves. There's an acoustic wave, and this has to be translated into text. How do we do that? How does she understand what I'm saying? Well, I used a word that is too loaded to understand In fact, were going to understand anything were gonna recognize the speech.
[0:12:25] Right. So this machine has no understanding of the subject, but will recognize that it says here free speech. And that's what we have to train it to do to recognize speech. We humans don't know how we recognize speech. And in this particular flavor of machine learning what you do is you create a statistical model and you say, if I give it enough examples, it will learn. And it has been learning, and it's getting better. Is it gonna get as good as humans? We don't know. Maybe it'll hit a wall.
[0:12:58] What is true is that for image recognition, for image specification, in many measures, machine learning has surpassed humans. In other settings it hasn't, but in many it has. In speech recognition, there is still a gap. This is still a problem and what you do is that from this properties here, you extract features and then by label, someone says these are the phonics. These represent the sound E and so on, right? And it's complicated, extremely complicated because the sound E
[0:13:34] has different physical creations, depending on what's before, what precedes it, and what follows that. So, one does not identify just the E. One identifies tri-phones, three phones together, is what the machine learning system is gonna learn. But I'm not gonna get into that. It gets really interesting. But that's just an idea of where the features come, of where the problem is, and why machine learning has become something that is really impressive. That something like this can be done with such a statistical model.
[0:14:12] Now, when you do speech recognition, this is from a neural network from about a year ago. Brian Kingsbury from IBM gave that to me, 7 hidden layers. You end up with up to 44 million parameters to optimize and you give it millions of examples to train. And it will take a couple of weeks. We usually work, our algorithms algorithms and speech optimization problems, to the point it takes a couple of weeks on a super computer. Just to feed that amount of information. So, what you see, there's a massive computational exercise that is taking place in order to get the statistical learning model to do something as complex
[0:14:49] is understanding speech that everybody uses in a different manner. And there's noise and so on. It's quite hard. One comment that one should make about this, I'm going to talk about new networks in a moment and optimizing them. But, we should step back and realize this is not the only thing that there are. Machine learning is a very big field. And linearized models have been extremely successful. So, Andrew Ng presented the following graph last year. It says if you look at the performance of algorithm as a function of the number data point that you give it, conventional models look like that right,
[0:15:30] this is just an opinion right, SVM. At some point, you don't gain anything by producing more data, if you create a simple neural network It does learn more with more data. If you have a deep neural network, it can really exploit more data and surpass the learning capacity of Neural networks. But there is a domain where the graph is inverted right? So, and there, perhaps even more problems that lie over here all right? [COUGH] You know, for self-driving cars, for image recognition, and so on.
[0:16:07] That's fine but what about medical applications where you don't have many data, there not so many experiments? And in journalism, and so on, there are many applications that lie over here, there is just a comment about machine learning is not deep neural networks, right, it's more than that. Training error versus testing error, so we train the prediction system on a set of data. But what we really want to do, is we want to understand the whole world. So, let xy, they know the set of all input output pairs. And they have a certain distribution.
[0:16:42] So, the set of all input output pairs really means the set of all things that have been said, and will be said, right? We don't know what they are, but we want to predict them all. So this is the ideal. The set of all input-output pairs and they have a certain joint distribution. We define then a composition, there's a prediction function H, right? That's what we want to find out and there's a lost function applied to that. The composition of the two is going to be denoted by F. So that problem of minimizing the error that I wrote before is here. That's called the empirical risk.
[0:17:19] Given the set of training points that we assume we only have n in which one for each data points we see how well our prediction matches the label, right? But ideally we don't want to do it just for the training set. Ideally, we want to do it for all possible input-output pairs. So the problem really is the integral. Over all possible input-output pairs, given that distribution. And you would say, well, this is pure math. Nobody's gonna be able to say anything about that problem. And it's gonna be interesting because you can say things about that problem and [INAUDIBLE] very interesting saying things about that problem.
[0:17:53] So we have a training set and we want to say things like, if my optimization algorithm is reducing the error on the training set at a certain rate, I know that it's doing that on the real problem. It's reducing the error on that problem too. Some optimization algorithms have that characteristic, some don't have that characteristic. So that some optimization algorithms are good learning algorithms, some are not good learning algorithms. Just training is not enough, they have to generalize. This is subtle, but some of these ideas will come in here. So with this location.
[0:18:27] The empirical problem becomes a finite sum problem, and so remember that, so, our objective function consists of a sum of f5 functions, compositions of loss and prediction functions there. What is the most popular method used today to train neural networks? By far, the stochastic gradient method that I will describe here, is the thing that is being used. And it seems one of the dumbest algorithms. It doesn't seem one of the most intelligent algorithms. It has a lot of errors, it's very noisy.
[0:18:59] It doesn't always go downhill, it goes all over the place. It has emerged as the preeminent optimization method for large scale machine learning and that is true as of today. But it shouldn't because there are important limitation of that method. But that's the algorithms that if you go to those silicon valley companies that are doing all these marvelous things, behind there, there is a stochastic gradient method, with some variations being used to train these systems and over hours and hours of computation. And what the stochastic gradient method does is the following. If your objective function is to minimize the sum of n terms what would you do?
[0:19:37] You just go downhill. We're so used to this downhill methods. Well, that's not what they will do. They say don't compute the gradient. The gradient of that objective function is the sum of all the gradients. Instead of that they say, choose one training point. Imagine that the objective function instead of having a million examples just has one. Pick one of those at random. At random, choose one of those functions there. The laws associated with that particular training point, and compute the gradient of that function and move along that direction. So instead of having the summation of all you move one.
[0:20:14] But you do it sort of independently and at random. And this becomes a much cheaper computation because the gradient would have a million of those components and we just compute one gradient and move along that direction. That's the Stochastic Gradient Method from 1951, Robins Monroe gave a whole theory, it was a very impressive thing. If this is done in the proper way, this cheap and noisy iteration will converge at the fast rate. As I mentioned, it's not necessarily keeps going downhill, it's a method that in some equation that I'll put down here has a drift. That takes it to the solution, but it goes around in many ways.
[0:20:52] It is really a stochastic process, a chain. Where at every iteration you choose a new data point independently. And so in expectation you're gonna be doing the right thing. Okay, now in contrast to that, the stochastic gradient method, in contrast to that is the true gradient method. But people in machine learning like to call it the batch method because it uses a whole batch of information, right? So the true gradient method will just compute the gradient of your real objective function, which is now the sum of all those gradients there. And that goes downhill.
[0:21:28] It's a more expensive, more accurate step. And where as the stochastic gradient you may have to do 50,000 iterations to get to the solution, with this method you may only need 50. But, of course, 50 of a much more expensive iteration. And this turns out, that is not a good learning algorithm. It's a bad learning algorithm. But there's something else we discovered in the last few months, [COUGH] that I will present now. So, if this was a good way of training machine learning, it would be very good in the sense that that iteration is easy to parallelize.
[0:22:07] If I have 2000 computers at my disposal, what I would do is, take that summation of those millions of examples and just distribute that over notes. I do the evaluation that it seems to be so expensive, I could do very quickly, I could move and it would be competitive out there. Moreover, If you look at textbooks, you see that if you have the gradient, you can do a lot with that. There's a whole arsenal of algorithms for optimization that you could use there. You could use quasi-Newton methods and other methods that converts much faster.
[0:22:41] So it would be very good news if you've done that. So the reason is, why is it that doing the inexact, noisy, gradient method is better than doing the true gradient method. As you forget about neuro networks and look at logistic regression. Take a very large logistic regression problem like the ones that people are doing for speech recognition before neuro network. And you'll run a batch algorithm [COUGH] a true gradient algorithm. And you run the stochastic gradient method. And you look at time.
[0:23:13] This says access point, but it's really time. In time, how does the arrow decrease? And, by the way, here the arrow is measured as the percentage of correct classified frames. So think about it as words. How many of my words did I recognize correctly? So as you train the algorithm, the arrow goes down. But did you see how steep the decrease here becomes. Then this stagnate, if you magnify things, the gradient method gets much higher accuracy. But quite often this higher accuracy is not needed. So as you train, it turns out that this stochastic method goes faster,
[0:23:50] goes much faster, even though it's so noisy. How could that be? So I hope that you will remember the following picture, which is not mine, it's from Bertsekas. Suppose that you want to minimize a function which is the sum of quadratic functions. You want to find the minimum of some quadratic functions. Each of the quadratic functions has the minimum at zero. But it has it at different places, right?
[0:24:25] But the important thing is that the form of the objective function is the sum of functions of quadratics. Problem that I drew only has one variable right? So where is the solution? The minimum of all of the sum is here, right? [COUGH] So what happens if you start over here? There are only two decisions you have to take, left or right. And the problem that we have when we have a million variables is there 900,999 wrong ways to go.
[0:25:01] Well, if it's a two dimensional problem it's just left or right. So if I start here and I pick up any of those quadratics and look at the gradient of that quadratic, it's the derivative, right. So if I pick up this quadratic over here, how does it look? Well, it's high. Which way do I move to minimize it that way, right? If I pick up any quadratic over here, it will move it the right way. Now if I move over here, and I'm already to the left of one of them, I'm not guaranteed, right? If I pick up this one, it will tell me to go the wrong way.
[0:25:35] But it's much more likely that I'll pick up one of the other ones. So with very high probability, I keep drifting this way. And I've been able to move towards a solution by making a tiny amount of computational effort compared to having computed the whole gradient of the objective that forced me to look at a million functions and tell me go this way, right? So, this picture tells you that the Stochastic Gradient method has a characteristic. There is a transient behavior, this very fast increase that we saw in the beginning, is because it can make progress to the solution by investing very little effort, right?
[0:26:14] Then at some point, when you're over here, it is quite likely that it's actually going the wrong way. So, there is a pont that's gonna stagnate there, right? But, this is the best picture of saying, how could it be that doing a simple algorithm is better than a good one if the function has that form. If it doesn't have that form, no. We have the traditional methods are very good and I had another thing maybe try to remember and is the following. Suppose that someone gave you data set that is the exact duplicate of one set, take the data just duplicate it 10 times.
[0:26:52] What does the stochastic gradient method do every time just choose an element at random? It does the same thing regardless of whether you give it 1 training set or 10. On the other hand, the true batch gradient method. If you give it a training set that's 10 times bigger, the cost of evaluating the objective function is 10 times bigger. And has no more information, right? Now, is true that training sets are exact duplicates of one? No. Is it true that the training set has a lot of redundancy? Yes.
[0:27:25] So, the batch method is gonna have a lot of redundancy, right? Fine okay. So, by the way, I wrote a review paper with my colleagues [INAUDIBLE] and Frank Curtis It's online it's called optimization methods for machine learning. It gives you detailed proofs about these, and these arguments. So if you are interested, you could pick up there. I'm now going to go and give another reason why neural networks batch methods don't work done well. And I was really surprised to find this, this is one thing we found out, we're gonna try a batch method and a Stochastic method.
[0:28:06] Maybe I should use that word differently. Here's a Stochastic method and here's a batch method. One uses very little information at every iteration to compute the gradient, the other one uses a lot. So we're gonna use a method called Atom, which is a very method with momentum, right? But it can use any amount of information that you want. And so what we're gonna do is, we're gonna solve a problem with small information, and then more and more. And see how things work, right? And what I'm reporting here is as you change the batch size, what is the testing accuracy?
[0:28:43] Not the training accuracy, but what is the testing accuracy? Meaning, how well does it do on data that it has not seen? And we have found the following graph. The more information you give to the batch method, the worse it is, when it's applied to the real testing data. So, there's a tendency that way. Okay, you would say, really, how many networks? How did you do that?
[0:29:15] Throughout the years, the experts in machine learning tell me we use the Stochastic Gradient method because the batch methods over think. They solve the training problem too well. Stochastic Gradient method is right thing. No, that's not the reason, according to us. We have evidence. In fact what we discovered is, batch methods tend to be attracted to sharp minimizers of the training function and testing function. Whereas the Stochastic method to converse to wide minimizers of the objective function.
[0:29:50] Okay, so how do we know that we're not over fitting? The problem over fitting Is that when you see your, not the training arrow, when you see your validation arrow goes down then some points goes up, because you are over filling. Here they quickly without explaining the graphs, we don't see that phenomenon ever, right? It just gives getting better and better, we see no evidence of over fitting and I wanna spend much time on that graph just saying, that's not what we see. What we see is the following. If you had an optimization problem that had two solutions that were identical.
[0:30:26] Here it doesn't seem identical, but I'm gonna show you later on that all the optimizers tend to go to the same function value. If you had those two solutions, which one would you prefer? You know the objective function is the same. Suppose it is exactly the same. Which of these two objective functions would you prefer? And it turns out that this is a question that has to do with robust optimization, right? This solution is quite robust and this one is not so robust. If that's the true objective function.
[0:31:02] If you don't doubt it, it's the same. But if it's a surrogate for something else, if that's a training function, well, the testing function is not gonna be exactly the same it has different data, right? So if you [COUGH] apply the minimizer of that function to a slightly different function. What do you observe? That what was a very good minimizer before, has a high value now. And it's clearly a problem of sensitivity and so on. And it's pretty kind of common sense, right?
[0:31:35] If that is the situation, then you really should prefer the white minimizer. Because a look at this accuracy. Now I mentioned that for some reason, with a batch algorithm we lose the capacity to learn. This is the table that we presented, and I guess the paper was accepted to the ICLR conference, and we're going to do an oral presentation of that. Who knows, [COUGH] this is the Conference just on machine learning. We're gonna present this paper, I don't know how bad the attacks are gonna be from left and right. I'm sure there are gonna be people saying, I don't believe this.
[0:32:10] So, we have two, four, six. We have all these neural network configuration, feet forward neural networks, convolutional neural network. It's exactly what people use in practice those sciences. SB stands for Small Batch method. 256 data points used every time for one iteration and at the Large Batch method uses tens of thousands of training points at every iteration. The training accuracy, when you compare the small batch and the large method batch is pretty much the same, okay?
[0:32:44] So they get to the same training error. But when you look at the testing error, there is a consistent, small, but consistent difference between the two of them. That is the table that made us really worried. We thought, there's something really strange here and we spend the next six months doing all sorts of experiments to try to see we're not fooling ourselves. But there is a small but consistent [COUGH] degradation in performance. Those are the details, if anybody wants more,
[0:33:18] we can discuss them afterwards all the neural networks that we tried. By the way, we optimized them until we couldn't make anymore progress. So there was no early stopping or anything like that. Now this is the one and key picture about this observation here. Please focus only on the solid blue line. What this picture does is the following. We took a problem, we ran the stochastic gradient method and convert to some point, some point here. Then we ran the batch method, converts to another point over here. And then we looked at the line joining them and extended it.
[0:33:54] So the line joining, stochastic with a batch solution and then we go beyond that. And along that line, we plotted not the training error but the testing error, right? And use a lot of power because the data is very big. And computed the true objective function, right? The one that is for general population. And we found this phenomenon. The batch method is this, what we called sharp minimizer. And [COUGH] the stochastic method is around here. Now that's what we observe, and we have more pictures about that.
[0:34:30] This is a training error, right? Dashed line is the testing error. It's not identical but it sort of follows. And so you can see that doing this is not so terrible, right? But this gives you that 2%, that 3% difference, right? Whereas here, it's more stable, right? And in red is classification error and if you have enough time to look at this, you'll see that, well, you lose classification. It's the gap between the red line and the dotted line, that's what you lose.
[0:35:04] Okay now in this graph what we plotted is, [COUGH] as you increase the batch size, you just keep running the method with different batch sizes. You look at the minimizers that you are and you see how sharp they are. I'm going to tell you later how me measure how sharp the are. So what this is is we're measuring here the sharpness of the minimizer as a function of the batch size. So in red, so you see the sharpness tends to increase with the batch size. I'll tell you how we measure that sharpness. So that's one of the many experiments we did to try to see if we're really
[0:35:39] fooling ourselves. And we have, many other configurations like that. Here is where the batch method goes. Here is where the stochastic method goes. We just keep looking at those graphs. And then I keep showing it to some of my colleagues, some of my friends who are the real experts on this. And I tell them, please shoot it down. Tell me that this is not true, because why is this so, right? We did for the experts in machine learning, we did data augmentation to see if that would solve the problem. Various other techniques, there was still a gap. Less but there's still a gap, and they're interested in this.
[0:36:15] What is our sharpness measure? How do you know if a minimizer in a million variables is sharp? The right thing to do is compute the eigenvalues of the Hessian, right? That will tell you how fast the objective function is going at that point. Some researchers are doing that. Are trying to approximate all the eigenvalues. I'm really worried about some of the computations that they do, because tiny eigenvalues are very difficult to resolve. Some people are reporting small negative eigenvalues, and I wonder if that's really true.
[0:36:47] So in any case, we didn't do that, we did something that [COUGH] an undergraduate student would do. How do you know if a minimizer is sharp or not? We looked at a small neighborhood of that and sampled the function there many, many times. And then we saw what's the maximum possible value that you could obtain. Like looking at the sensitivity usually tells you what the worst case that can happen, right? So we did hundreds of those evaluation and in a neighborhood of 10 to the minus 3, around the point that you found and the sharpness is simply, what is the maximum value minus the value where you are and divided it by some quantity.
[0:37:27] Actually, we didn't need to divide by that one, to make it relative, right? That's what everybody would see, random sampling and so on. Now, this high quality Disney type animation that, I'm sorry it's so primitive, but let's see how it works. It's very gratifying. Because this animation tells you the concept of robust optimization. What is the classical problem of optimization? Find the minimum value of a function, right? But if the function is not reliable maybe that's not what I want.
[0:38:04] Maybe the problem is, given a disc of radius 0.1, can you tell me where is the point where I can push it down most, right? And in this particular case, if you tried to push it up here, it's over there, right? That's the best value. So this graph tells you this concept of robust optimization where the problem is no longer to minimize just some objective function, is to minimize the maximum value that objective function can attain in the small neighborhood of the solution. But the disks exemplifies things.
[0:38:43] So it's really a robust optimization problem. So we've really talk optimization techniques which help your machine running. Just use robust optimization and your problem is solved. You're gonna find the best solutions. Unfortunately, techniques of robust optimizations don't scale to even close to what is needed. [COUGH] So we'll end up with tiny neural networks that nobody's gonna take seriously. Really, so if the stochastic method is so much better than the batch method, what is actually happening there? How is it that one method gets the sharp minimizers and
[0:39:16] the other one gets the wide minimizer, right? So here is the way I see it, my geometrical interpretation. It's gonna be really good, but probably wrong. [COUGH] Because everything in 2 and 3D is not what happens in reality. But what I imagine is the following. First of all, neural networks are over-capacitated. And every minimizer, there will be flat regions because there are ways of changing parameters in a way that nothing changes. You can flip things. So the neural networks, every minimizer has to have flat directions. Those flat directions could be actually connected to other minimizers.
[0:39:52] So between a sharp minimizer and one, there could actually be a region where they're connected but [COUGH] But so, my interpretation of what's happening, the batch method takes all the information and goes down to the minimizer, that looks close to where it starts. Goes there and converges fairly fast to them. A stochastic method has noise, it sometimes moves to the left, then moves to the right, so it wanders around. It doesn't go into that regime. It wanders around, and gets pushed to a white area where there's a white minimizer. And some people think, when you want to do global optimization,
[0:40:28] it's good to have noise, because it will move you that way. Well, that's not relevant to here, we don't have that. In fact, we have regions that are smooth like this, but things are being pushed. Now the question is, how would the stochastic gradient method know how much noise? We have seven neural networks, right? How would it know how much noise to have in order to escape from that chart minimizer and get itself to the white minimizer? According to me, the reason has a lot to do with one parameter I never explained there in the stochastic variant method, and
[0:41:02] that's the step length, what they call the gain. So the gain, and I'm gonna go back to that slide, controls the amount of noise that you have. [COUGH] And it turns out that people don't know how to choose that gain. So in order to get my colleagues in machine learning angry at me, what I tell them is, fine, the stochastic method is a very good method, except that it doesn't exist. Nobody has ever told us how to choose that step length parameter. And how do people choose it in practice? The way they choose it in practice is the following. They have a training set, they have their algorithm,
[0:41:38] they choose a certain step length. They start running it, and they start seeing how the method is doing on the test set, not on the training set. If it's not doing well, they adjust it, and so on. And they do it many, many times. And every machine learning paper tells you we did training over 10, 50, 100 values. So according to my interpretation, what people are doing is, they're adjusting the value of noise so that they don't get trapped to that minimizer. Because what they want is good generalization. So they make it wander around, so that it goes like that, and [COUGH] and maybe that's what happened.
[0:42:15] So in order to verify these observations and see if they are true, what we did is the following. Suppose you run a stochastic gradient method is going to go to some particular minimizer, and after every epoch, after every so many iterations of that method, we fire up the batch method. Where will it go? So we did that in this experiment. So do one epoch, you see the whole data with this stochastic gradient method. There's another one, there's another one, until you converge. Now after the first epoch, fire up a batch method. After the second one, fire up, and so on, and what do you see?
[0:42:52] Well there's gotta be a table here that's gonna be hard to read. But what it pretty much says is the following, is if you run the stochastic method for a couple of epochs, and then switch the batch method, you still go to the batch solution. If you do more of those at some point, the batch method will go to the right place. There is a region of transition or so on. Can one prove, understand, I don't know, sorry, but typo. Can one prove, understand the reasons for convergence to sharp minima? If it's really true.
[0:43:30] What is the relative frequency of sharp minima to white minima in these neural networks? Is it just this class of functions, I have more classes of functions for which one could say something like that. Can one steer a batch method to got to the right place? That would be good because we cannot have to paralyze it. And as I will explain, the stochastic gradient method is very difficult to paralyze. So these are open questions. Just go take them and do your thesis and you'll become famous.
[0:44:03] I thought that any student who is first exposed to this stochastic gradient method would say, well, would it converge? It takes three lines and almost no knowledge of anything but calculus to go ahead and derive the following inequality. So it's in my review paper, it's in many proofs, classical proofs hidden inside three lines, really. And this applies for strongly convex functions. And all you need to do is have Taylor's theorem there. It says the following. R is a training error, W are the parameters. This is, [COUGH] the difference, the change that you make in those parameters.
[0:44:42] How much do you decrease your objective from one iteration to the next? Now it says there, an expectation, right? Suppose there is no expectation. So what would the first thing say? What is the decrease of the objective function? Well you want it to be negative, right? You want the new value to be smaller than the previous one. And the first term is good. How much do I decrease it by, by the norm of the true gradient of the objective function. Now this is a result for the stochastic gradient method, not for the batch method. It says, how much does this method that wanders around decrease your
[0:45:17] objective function at every step? By a term that is proportional to the true gradient of the objective function. That is classical optimization. So in standard books, any gradient method will decrease the function according to how big the gradient is. Initially very big, and of course when you're close to the solution, there's a small component. You cannot decrease it by very much, right? But there is a positive term there, but there is a term that is pushing you towards making things worse. And that term depends on what is that quantity there, it's really the variance,
[0:45:53] it looks like the second moment, it's really the variance because the expected value of that quantity is a true gradient, which is 0 at the solution. So the second quantity is the variance of those gradients. So you don't have the true gradient. You pick these things at random and you get these different, you want to see what the variance of that is, right? So the variance of those terms clearly is making you drift. But there is a component that starts taking you to the solution, which of these two wins? Well, remember I was telling you that people cheat with a step length.
[0:46:29] Well the key thing is that the step length parameter, alpha k, how far you go enters quadratically in the last term and linearly in the first term. That means that if you choose alpha k to diminish as the iteration progresses, you can make that term diminish at the same grade in this diminishing and you can get convergence to the solution. So now this is an expectation, right? So because that method is random, it could diverge. But if you run it many, many times this is what you would expect, right?
[0:47:03] There are the two terms that fight each other, and you can control how good the algorithm is by decreasing that variant or by making the step length small. And the classical thing so far has been to play with the step length. So Robinson Monroe, in 1951, wrote a paper on this method. First time ever proposed, and they already proved that it converges if the step length alpha k is chosen pretty much like 1 over k. This is the right balance, provided these estimates are the gradient term bias and
[0:47:39] very few assumptions, truly impressive. We would all like to write a paper that people are talking about 64 years from now, in the year 2075. Great paper, already have that. Focus on the [INAUDIBLE] control the noise. But you can control the noise by making that estimate better. So in fact, one topic that is part of the second part of my talk, doesn't it make sense actually to start like this. To start the grain,
[0:48:12] start increasing the amount of information that you use more and more gradually. So that this variance would decrease without having to decrease the step length. Because the problem about decreasing the step length is yes, the noise decreases. But you make smaller and smaller steps, and the whole thing stagnates, so nobody finds a perfect recipe for which it go linearly to the solution. And for that, you would have to increase that, we call that dynamic sampling algorithm. Here is one of the world experts on that. Exactly as what rate should you do this to get different rates of convergence, linear, quadratic and so on.
[0:48:43] And so, very appealing things to do and to me a lot of the future of optimisation in machine running, has to do with finding that right balance between those terms there. So, what do I love about academia? Dealing with young people, open minds, smart people exchanging ideas, and so on. What do I hate about academia? People can not finish their talks. >> [LAUGH] >> Under five minutes, but wait a minute I have 25 more slides, nobody wants to see them, but still I'm gonna push them. I hate that about academia.
[0:49:20] So I cannot to do that you, right? I'll just outline, [COUGH] what is the second part of this talk. It's based on one observation, the stochastic gradient method, workhorse for training neural networks, does not parallelize well. It is an inherently sequential procedure, when people try to do it in parallel, it does not, you just run it in parallel, it gives you very little. So there are synchronous versions of the algorithm, that I will not describe here, that can give you parallelism. But it's amazing, you may get a P77 by using 2,000 machines or
[0:49:54] something like that, so it doesn't parallelize well. And everything is being done in parallel, so there's a disconnect within the [INAUDIBLE] showed you there. We'll run on a sequential machine, what will happen in practice, so we still want algorithms that paralyze, and algorithms that paralyze will have to do more work for iteration. And so that is the motivation for, this may not be the ultimate algorithm, we want algorithms that do more work. And the second part of the talk was about that iteration here, right? And in fact I will stop with that slide,
[0:50:28] this is the only thing I am going to show, the problem is still the same. The objective function is the sum of a million terms, there is still machine learning, it could be neural networks, it could be logistic regression. What we say is we are going to do a Newton Method on that problem. Newton's Method on that problem, okay, what is Newton's Method well, you take the objective function, you take the Hessian, and solve that. Sounds ridiculous, right? The Hessian [INAUDIBLE] variables [INAUDIBLE]. No, I mean, I mentioned this problem has a lot of redundancy, right? Why can't you sample the Hessian, what do I mean by sampling the Hessian,
[0:51:06] well, the objective function is a sum of term what is the gradient? The sum of gradients, what is the Hessian, the sum of Hessians? The sum of a million Hessians, what about if instead of a million Hessians I just a thousand of them, at random? And form the true hessian, to be the sum of 1,000 randomly chosen Hessians there. If they're all convex, it will give me a well defined iteration, same thing for the gradient. The gradient could have only one training point, or
[0:51:41] it could have them all, what about if we choose a smaller value, right? So a subsample Newton method it's gonna do the following. It's gonna coordinate these two samples. The sample for the Hessian here is going to be smaller than the sample for the gradient because the gradient is more important than the Hessian. Then you're still faced with solving that linear system because each gradient is of dimension one million, and it stands. So, this linear system of equations is still enormous, but here's an expert. We have methods.
[0:52:17] What about if you apply the conjugate gradient method to approximately solve that system? And the conjugate gradient method, all what it needs is product of that Hessian with vectors. But the Hessian is a sum of the little Hessians, all I have to do is a product with those Hessians, you can call them really easily. So you can apply the conjugate gradient method, an inexact method, to compute an inexact Newton step. So it's subsample Newton method is not really a Newton method, it's an approximation to the Newton method. One can do that now in an intelligent way where you start initially with a very small sample for
[0:52:54] the gradient, start increasing the amount of information from the gradient. And as you proceed, you start putting more and more Hessian information, and there are a couple of papers we have are coming out on that. Will this compete with a cirgasted gradient method? So, we have complexity results about this, we have conversion results, and I mention again Ragu. I don't know if he is here, he's got a beautiful paper there, more generally clear about coordinating these quantities here. So the main message is Parallelism has been exploited properly in optimisation, that remains to be done.
[0:53:34] It's not mainstream, which is good. I know a thousand papers coming out of that, but it is not a straight forward application of ideas from non- [INAUDIBLE] programming. This is stochastic optimisation one has to use the information the right way. So thanks for your attention. >> [APPLAUSE] >> So his question is that this method, at some parameters, it tells you how much you increase the sample sizes for both the function and the gradient. Is there a way to optimize that, is there a way to make that intelligently? And what we're doing is we're finding ways for inserted conversion result.
[0:54:11] But, there's a lot of activity today on optimizing hyper parameters for optimization using neural networks in order to find what the right rates in which these quantities could be done. That's an open question, I mean, there are papers about that. I know that people at Google have found positive results by training neural networks, optimizing the parameters of neural networks. And it has worked, right? So that was his question, and it is possible. >> [INAUDIBLE] To the right direction that you will get [INAUDIBLE].
[0:54:51] >> Yeah, choosing a direction that's close to the batch direction, that's difficult to measure, right? [COUGH] You can estimate variances using sample variances, but they will be inexact, right? Yeah, we actually look at the proof, in the proof, there's a key inequality and I think that's the quantity one wants to push. You have ways of combining the two methods. So first, at Microsoft research there's a call called Project Terrace Gale something, they have the following implementation. They have gradient method and at some point it switches to limited memory BFGS.
[0:55:29] That's not elegant right? What really I think is elegant it is to do it in a gradual way, to make the algorithm evolve. And not evolve because the optimization of something but evolve in terms of learning. So the guiding principle is, I know the stochastogram is a good learning algorithm, and then it ceases to be a good learning algorithm. [MUSIC]
