Jorge Nocedal, 'How is it Possible to Train Deep Neural Networks?', NITMB Seminar Series (NSF-Simons NITMB, Chicago), recorded 2024-10-25, uploaded 2025-07-18. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XrX7MEMbdYw
Transcript: YouTube captions (automatic ASR, English), grouped into ~30 s blocks with start timestamps; not human-checked by this project. Retrieved 2026-09-28 by research agent 02 (stated methodology). Speaker quotes taken from this file are marked as caption-derived in ../../research/02-methodology.md.

[0:00:00] a administrative thing. If you haven't already done so, please sign the sign-in sheet when you at the end of the talk so that we can keep track of attendance and things like that. But today, it's a great pleasure to introduce Professor Hy Nosidal, the Walter P. Murphy Professor of Industrial Engineering, Management Sciences, and Applied Mathematics at Northwestern University. Jorge is an expert in all things optimization and uh has won many awards including recently the John vonoman uh award from Siam and we're really excited to have
[0:00:33] you talk. >> All right. Thank you very much for the organizers everybody here applied math friends I have a courtesy appointment in applied math department and sometimes when people ask me what are you I never say industrial engineer and there's a great department at Northwestern. I'm something between a computer scientist and applied mathematician. Uh but these days who knows right stats, machine learning and all those things. Um great. So this talk is going to be about training just training deep neural networks or any of the networks that we have today. Um nothing about
[0:01:07] neuroscience just called machine learning. Um how do you train them? Well, you train them with what's called back propagation. They use that word back propagation but back propagation means computation of derivatives and then the application of a gradient descent method in order to find the optimal weights. Now it turns out that that optimization process is not well understood. Um it's exceedingly expensive to train one of the modern neural networks. It takes weeks to train a neural network on
[0:01:43] um whole farm of GPUs. uh and the training and the inference of machine learning systems now uh is consuming as much energy as mid uh size countries as Argentina. You've probably seen that that the usage of AI right now is comparable to the whole usage in Argentina. And and where does where where does it come from? inference whenever you go to chat GPT and you're asking all these silly questions there and when you train right so it's imperative actually to
[0:02:18] improve the optimization process for environmental reasons economical reasons but especially to open up the field for people who don't have enormous computational resources um it's it's very important for instance that now the large language models are there that the public doesn't only uh do finetuning but maybe they have a chance to do pre-training and I think there's this community in optimization that says can we reduce memory cost CPU times in order to make things like this possible right all right so
[0:02:54] >> the the query versus the training is this like orders of magnitude difference >> oh yeah okay so so the question is um the the computational cost of a query of inference compared to the training what are they and I don't know the great numbers but I I just know that the training itself um consumes a huge amount of time and uh queries inference is done with lower precision people are pushing to the lowest precision if uh for floating point eight um and you
[0:03:28] probably it's very difficult to go be below that it's actually surprising that you go to uh below eight and thank you for asking the question because I think I have a lot of material here that is not re is too too deep into optimization and may want to stay more in the uh uh a high level here. So, so the question is uh optimization of training neural networks is not well understood because what if you think about it why does it even work and when people write papers there is a lot of confusion
[0:04:03] people keep reporting conflicting observations people find results they gloss over them and they go on to the next thing some aspects are well understood and I'll talk about them but what we know is that empirically you can train a neural network. We know it's possible, right? Um, now the advances in machine learning in the last 15 years have been made possible by a combination of two things. Innovative architectures and I'm going to talk a little bit about this architectures that are conducive to be
[0:04:35] trained and second development of optimization algorithms that will work for the training process. uh the interplay with this these two activities um is the key and I will not talk here a lot about the theory there's immense amount of theory about a two-layer neural network and all sorts of properties like that I'm going to be uh focusing more on the computational aspects of training a neural network meaning I have students and colleagues in the tech industry um and have discussions with them by the way a
[0:05:08] student who graduated two years ago Michael Shei, he graduated from our department. This year he and his team at Meta won the machine learning training competition which is called the ML Commons. It's a competition set up by Google, Meta and other companies. they they uh create some benchmarks, ask people to um uh uh produce their code and they run it and then they see quality of results and and speed and uh I I was glad to see that my former
[0:05:40] student won by a lot and they beat what is called the atom method. I will talk about it in a moment with a more advanced algorithm and so now there's a little bit of a excitement about maybe things are going to be changing there. So we want to talk to that community um to the industry. Some open questions, how can we design uh neural network architectures that are conducive to optimization and the use of skip connections, residual networks, normalization layers have made a huge change and I'll describe this a
[0:06:14] little bit. The other thing we want to understand what is the landscape optimization landscape? How does the objective function look like? What is the intrinsic dimensionality of the problem? People you hear that people say that u large language models use billions of parameters. Do you need billions of parameters? When you actually optimize it, what is the space that the optimization algorithms explore compared to these billions of variables? And uh can we design more powerful optimization algorithms that balance nonlinearity
[0:06:47] and and noise? This is a field where theory has followed experimentation all the time. So people for instance come up with residual networks and then there are a lot of papers trying to explain why they work well and so on. There are probably at least 1,000 papers that are devoted not to the theory just to the computational aspects of uh machine learning and it's a rapidly uh evolving field. Everybody's very excited about transformers these days. And as um Becca and I heard in an impressive plenary
[0:07:21] talk a couple of years ago um from someone who's really inside the industry, large language models are doing things that people didn't expect them to do. Uh it it is surprising. So we are in a exciting time right now. Optimization plays actually a dual role in um in in machine learning. So first of all, it finds the parameters. It's used in training, right? So it determines the parameters, the weights of the neural network. And once you have the weights, you put the information
[0:07:53] here, boom, and you got your prediction. All right? So we know that. But what is not so well known is that when people are designing architectures, when someone is designing a new architecture, if they cannot train it, they abandon that architecture. So if for some reason we haven't delivered enough optimization algorithms or if that person was not persistent enough or clever enough to use optimization properly that idea gets just shelled because you cannot train it. And we believe that there's a cycle that has happened. There's an optimizer
[0:08:27] called atom that everybody's using. And so the perception is that if you come up with an idea that cannot be trained with atom then it gets rejected right and so optimization plays that dual role and that is why the industry actually is quite interested in the um there are many machine learning experts who learn about optimization. They teach each other they read books they go to lectures and that's one of the rapidly um uh increasing fields of optimization. All right. Why has deep learning been so
[0:09:01] effective? Why are these structures so effective? Well, it's a special kind of function in neural network. We know that it has high expressive power. The other thing is that from day one, they were designed to be fully differentiable. So, well, there may be value there, but it doesn't matter, right? Work in the space of real numbers. don't work in the space of integers. Even though neurons may be 01, we have to work in the space of real numbers because we're going to
[0:09:35] have to do highdimensional and highdimensional optimization cannot really be done in a mixed domain. Make it fully differentiable and then make it optimizable. And this was a complete fluke. The people who invented these architectures, they did not know that they were going to be that could be optimized. Um the key always is activations have to be nonlinear. The activation function has to be nonlinear. I don't know that it's possible to do an intelligent function of this kind that doesn't have a
[0:10:07] nonlinear activation. And here you see the more typical ones used in industry. Um and the objective function that you minimize is um what they call cross entropy laws which is sort of generalization is a maximum likelihood estimation. and you just try to guess the data that you have as well as possible. All right. So if you create a huge neural network like this with millions of parameters and you train it, can you really find a set of weights is going to work for all
[0:10:40] the data that you're going to be giving it? Right? So you train your facial recognition phone and now you're going to get lots and lots of different data of different people. Is a set of weights really going to work for all of that? Um, while the objective function is highly nonlinear and there are so many weights, does the function that you minimize look like this or does it look like that? So if the objective function that you're
[0:11:12] minimizing looks like this and you start at the right place, you're probably going to get to the right. But if it looks like this, who knows where you're going to get. And what do I have here? I have a picture of actual loss functions of deep residual networks. And these are slices in two dimensions. These are actual pictures. And the nice neural network on the left has these residual blocks that I will explain. the other ones do not have them and in fact training neural networks was becoming impossible um at some point.
[0:11:48] Now I find yes big enough that you just have tons of close to global but I don't know. So the question is do you think that these pictures are representatives? Um you have in mind problems where there have many minimizers um uh objective function is many minimizers. I am very confused about the picture in my mind
[0:12:22] because I always have one picture that I know is wrong and my picture is all neural networks uh that I know even transformers are degenerate. The minimizers are degenerate means that at the minimizer they're invariant directions where the function is flat. Why is that flat? Well, when systems are over capacitated, it's because of that, right? But the neural network itself by its nature, if you have an arc, a node and another arc, if you multiply by one by alpha and
[0:12:56] multiply the other one by one over alpha, you get the same result. So there are invariances. So the picture that I have is like a Mexican hat that there are minimizers and there are families of minimizers like this. And whenever we do experiments it works like that. Whenever we do pictures it never looks what happens is now this is too high dimensional to be seen. Right? So are these pictures just fooling you or not? Well the only thing I can say is that these are pictures and the person who invented residual networks uses these pictures in part to motivate what he
[0:13:29] did. But I'm going to talk more about that. He's got a much better explanation of of what it is. I'm always worried about pictures of optimization in two dimensions. Um it's always the same thing. You get the contours like that and everybody starts saying, "Oh, I know how to do better algorithm. You take this, this, and that." And I'll put another line and this is Netor's algorithm and that's not true. Nester's algorithm is a is a mathematical miracle, right? Some coefficients that work just precisely, right? Not pictures, right? Um so good thing at the very beginning of the field one
[0:14:03] of the first people who worked on on neural network was Rosen blood in the 1960s. He was not the very first one but he had a machine and they were making big statements about everything is going to transform the world. This is the first she said I'm I'm creating the first system that that uh is shaped by data. She was already already talking about the right way of seeing things and one of the leaders in that field Marvin Minsky kept writing on paper things like this. I don't believe this is going to work because even if a gradient can be computed of that objective function
[0:14:36] unless the structure of the search space is special which I don't know what it means mathematically the structure of the space is special hill climbing will do more harm than good. So I think what he meant is unless the objective function has some very benign properties I think that trying to minimize is going to be like playing the lottery. Right now that's 19 or 88 that he was saying that we know now that the landscape is benign. It had to be benign otherwise things wouldn't
[0:15:08] work. And we have much other evidence but we don't really understand why in what way it is benign. And there is a concern that we are creating systems that are used in everyday life that lack theory. Um theory is following heristics as I mentioned and it's highly incomplete. So we're dealing with a purely experimental huristical um stage of computer science and even computer science that you would say well it's not mathematically inclined
[0:15:41] everything that people did in computer science over the last 100 years was understood I mean when people had better database people had better searching whatever um risk architectures it was understood right now it's not understood now it's empirical we're going this And uh one thing that I keep in mind when Becca was saying what picture do you have about the neural network I don't have a picture but my picture of the field is the following. When Columbus was talking to the monarchs of
[0:16:13] Spain about doing his trip I read that one of his advisers or more of them told them you know this guy is totally underestimating the size of the world. He's planning for a trip is not going to work. He doesn't have enough thing. This is way too big. Don't fund that. And for some reason, they funded it. Right now, we don't know what in between he has like neural networks. Just just do it and see what happens. Right? If the guy if the guy dies, no problem. He's a big talker, right? So, let him go, right? And then in 1942, he discovered
[0:16:47] something and he made four trips. And after four trips, he didn't understand better what he was still thinking. He got to the Indies. So, I think we're a little bit like this that we've discovered something. We know it's big. As time goes by, it looks bigger. We're not exactly sure what it is. We don't know what the limits are. Um, and but we have to accept it because sometimes things work that way. So, Columbus was lucky because they happen to be continent in between otherwise it would have been trouble here. And here with neural networks, we're lucky because for some reason the stuff is working. And in
[0:17:20] particular the question about um the expressivity of the neural networks um attention mechanisms and the optimization process that all these things are working um it's luck because it's not like we we discovered that all right just to get a little bit of perspective of how the field evolved machine learning has been around for a long time neural networks has been around for a long time they had successes and failures over the years but In around 2011, they did a series of experiments. The group around Jeff
[0:17:54] Hinton did some experiments on speech and image processing that uh really changed the field. So there is something called Alex Net considered to be the beginning of the new era of uh neural networks machine learning used only eight layers. So deep learning was eight layers and 60 million parameters. But already at that time they were using data augmentation relations and GPUs. Uh now it turns out that if you take
[0:18:27] today if I give you the Alex net which is easily obtainable you will not have any problems with training it. Training it will be easy. Uh but that was 2011. As people started making the networks deeper and deeper it became increasingly more difficult to train. And by 2014, people were reporting that when they were trying to do the optimization, they're encountering vanishing or exploding gradients. That sounds very spectacular, right? What does that mean mathematically?
[0:18:59] Slow convergence um and the necessity of using very small step lengths like that. Um and techniques that were done in order to um try to improve things were insufficient. Exploding gradients means the gradients are becoming very very large. Uh um vanishing gradients some weights have no effect anymore. You've done a a neural network for instance a recurrent neural network so convoluted that when you find out what's the partial derivative of the objective function with respect to that
[0:19:30] cost is almost nothing. And you have lots of those but other gradients are very large and you don't believe that it's true that just some parameters are going to determine everything. It's a concoction of the architecture. You got yourself painted yourself into a corner. So deeper and deeper architecture were becoming difficult. But around 2015 and 16 people came to with two big ideas that changed uh things. One is called batch normalization which I'll try to explain or layer normalization.
[0:20:04] It was designed in order to improve the optimization but people found out that it also improves generalization and then there is the idea of residual connections um that made the deep learning possible. Now these are the algorithms that are being used in in in practice but I will not talk much about this. Now just to have a general idea a mathematical or approximation theory or learning theory perspective of what we're doing here is we're trying to create a um
[0:20:39] prediction function and we want it to be good. We want the expected value of the error in making predictions to be small. But that error has three components. The first one is the approximation error. We have a neural network of a certain size that can only represent certain things in the space of all things that can be said or images that exist. We have an approximation error h. We're living in that function h or the neural network that we're working on. Then there is an
[0:21:13] estimation error. We are working with we're not minimizing over the entire population, you know, we're minimizing the objective function with respect to the training set that we have. And finally, you optimize your objective function to a certain degree. And all of these things have to balance each other. There's no point in doing optimization to much higher degree than the estimation error would be. Uh and so you have to see where actually are the problems here. what is causing you uh more difficulties. Of course, the
[0:21:45] approximation error is a more difficult thing for us to try to even contemplate uh what it means. Um it's very surprising that for images image classification errors are almost zero which means that the approximation error is not very large. Right? But now we got into um language and more of more than that predicting
[0:22:18] the next word, the next sentence. Well, they're errors. They're big errors. Um we don't know what that is to to to what degree do you um do you train the neural networks, right? And right now how much you optimize is something that is determined by time more than by uh being I have conversed to the solution. I I want to just say a question here about the practitioners because uh there are so many people just in my family cousins nephews so on are talking about oh I'm using the learning rate I'm using Laura I'm using fine they're all you know
[0:22:52] they're all into data science right and the learning rate the step length of the algorithm right so you have an optimization algorithm and you have to decide how far how big the step should be it turns out and I will not get into really what the math here is. But if you look at the expected value, expected improvement during the optimization process, you have weights K + one and you have an estimate of the weights K and you're
[0:23:24] updating them. How much progress do you make in decreasing your residual your loss function depends on a negative quantity. This is good. You're making progress. you're decreasing your true objective and there is a a positive term. So there is something that is driving the optimization down and something else is creating problem and this second term really is noise. This second moment is really noise. But when you do the analysis it turns out that the first term depends linearly on the step length
[0:23:59] and the second quadratically on the step length. Which means that if you make the steps small enough, you can compensate for noise. You can decrease noise so you can make progress. And so in machine learning, they call it the learning rate, which is also not uh informative. But what you really try to do is balance uh nonlinearity, how far can I move with with um controlling noise. And this is something that people are trying to do with just one algorithm. like one algorithm is going to find do the two
[0:24:31] things and that seems pretty impossible to do. That's why there's this learning rate. People are playing with a learning rate and a typical machine learning system when it's trained is trained with maybe a hundred different choices uh for that alpha and then you find out which one will work and then you use that. Now do all optimization methods yield the same generalization? when you're applying optimization methods to a training neural network, do you always get same generalizations?
[0:25:05] Well, here's an example that we produced um in 2017 and it's still valid today to some extent. Suppose you have an objective function that has two minimizers at the same level, but one of them is a white minimizer and the other one is a sharp minimizer. and and this is a minimizer of the training function, right? You have data and with that you're trying to minimize your um um you're doing a regression, right? Which of these two minimizers would you prefer? Well, and an
[0:25:39] optimization we call them robust. The white minimizer is robust and the other one is is is a sharp minimizer. Well, it is known now after many years in the area of machine learning is that if you can encourage your optimization algorithms to go to flat minimizers, you are in fact going to get better generalization. What happens with these minimizers? That's subject to discussion. Right? Can you somehow guide the optimization process towards those minimizers? And that people would call that implicit
[0:26:12] regularization, right? you make things more robust instead of putting a real an explicit regularizer if you if the optimization alg can navigate to those regions is going to work better. Now in general the field of robust optimization tells you oh we're not interested in just getting to the lowest point of the function but I want to know is I have a disk where can I put the disk down as much as possible right so you minimize the maximum value that that function has
[0:26:44] in a neighborhood where is the maximum value the function is the least right this is robust optimization and we would like to do robust optimization in neural networks but formally correct robust optimization is too expensive the use of semi-definite programming or conic programming you cannot do that and this is an experimental science people are trying to play with ideas that emulate this for instance you will find among the thousand papers that I mentioned something called sharpness aware optimization method that has something that I will not describe in much detail
[0:27:17] and says oh here's a heristic and this is going to tend to guide you to to the appropriate minimum minimizers and there's some truth to that. So here's an example of a residual network and here are slices of minimizers obtained by the stochastic gradient method and this is by the sharpness aware minimizer and they try to plot the objective function around here and they see that if you don't do anything you come to the regions where the minimizers don't look wide but that algorithm tries
[0:27:50] to promote uh robustness does that right now. Do people use that algorithm in practice? No. Because it's more expensive. And why? Because by playing with other things, maybe you can get to those right minimizers. Also, by the way, it's not right solution. It's a a empirical solution. But people give information to try to back up statements. uh like uh training a neural network is an optimization problem that is underdetermined
[0:28:23] and needs to be regularized. Can we do some sort of implicit regularization? Can we create can we make the algorithm go to the right type of minimizers? Right? Um minimum norm minimizers or so. So let me talk a little bit about architectures from the point of view of optimization. I mentioned batch normalization and residual connections. Whenever you do nonlinear optimization, what is the key? What is the key thing?
[0:28:57] The starting point where do you start? Right? And here we are in the world of applied mathematicians. There are tons of problems that that are solved that are based on differential equations. For instance, design problems, control problems, and so on. Um where do you start? Well, you start with a design that is very close to what you wanted, as close as what you like. Um but for deep neural networks, the initial point is the initial set of weights. What are the initial set of weights?
[0:29:29] What idea? Do you have any idea what they are? And so people say, "No, we don't. We're going to choose them at random with some considerations. So the considerations are the following. If you consider that the information you're giving to the neural network here is random in some sense. It's putting random data. If you produce random weights is going to make the result more random. Right? So we look at the
[0:30:02] variances and what we get is the initial variance of the data gets multiplied by the variance of the weights and n which is the num times n which is the number of neurons and what you want to really control is the variance how do I make this term as small as possible because this one is fixed so there's a very simple rule you make the variance to be um 2 overn n or the standard deviation is square<unk>
[0:30:34] of 2 over n and a very simplistic reasoning. So this is used in practice. How do you start the weights in the optimization process? You choose them from a normal distribution with mean zero and standard deviation 2 overn where n is the number of neurons of the first layer. Now you would like to do this analysis for all the layers but we can't. We can't do analysis of almost anything in deep neural network because gets too nonlinear. Right? By the way, this dotproduct
[0:31:06] um activation dotproduct activation it's at best a polomial if you have um a 100 variables a polomial of 100 variables and if you have 20 layers of degree 20 we don't know what that is right um and people use uh models from um uh spin glass uh model and so on to try to Find how many stationary points are there and minimizers and so on and if you go that way it looks like the problem is hopeless you take polomials
[0:31:40] of high degree there are minimizes and stationary points everywhere so in any case another heristic you start you should choose a starting point that way uh and layer normalization is an idea that I think it's become so important without that I I don't know of any system that does not use what it's called layer normalization or batch normalization now each neuron can take arbitrary values, right? We don't know what these neurons are going to do during the course of the optimization. Why not create some order among the
[0:32:13] neurons? So that maybe neurons that are together are doing something similar and other neurons that are similar do something similar. Just try to put some order between them. So how about if you adjust each batch? You're going to take the neurons and take a group of them. you're going to call them a batch and you're going to reenormalize when when when you're training and you're getting values for those for for those neurons, you're going to normalize it. You're going to bring them together. Um in particular, what you're going to do is um
[0:32:46] these are now the group of neurons. So suppose that Z1 represents 50 neurons. What you're going to do is among that 50 50 neurons, you're going to take the mean of them and the standard deviation and you're going to subtract that to them and that's called batch normalization. Um, and you do that for every one of them. So you don't let the neurons fire completely arbitrarily but you put that order also uh derived heristically and um and and it facilitates the
[0:33:19] optimization process enormously. But the one thing I I wanted to have time to talk about our residual networks. Yes. Oh. >> Yeah. And she was saying uh and are these orders um maintained during the optimization process or are they shuffled along? Right. Um I am much more familiar with a uh setup where they're fixed ahead of time.
[0:33:54] By the way, since you asked that question, you probably been hearing about fine-tuning large language models. You have a pre-trained neural network which is enormous with billions of parameters. Then you get one of these systems like Glama, which an open-source system, and says you create new data, and we're going to we're going to there's this software that is going to adjust the neural network. So it is good for latex I don't know something it's going to be better at latex you give it a lot of examples right and the finetuning works in a subspace instead
[0:34:29] of moving those billions of parameters only move some of them and the first successful idea was to only update the attent uh the parameters of the attention matrices but recently have people have found that if you go and and change these coefficients in batch normaliz ization during fine-tuning. It also helps instead of taking those numbers you you you learn the numbers in batch normalization >> talking about the energy cost you said
[0:35:05] one thing people will do is they'll like quantize the weights for inference. So I guess I wonder like does batch normalization then affect how accurate a quantized network is? Like is there some interplay there? >> I'm sure there is. But to understand it um and when you say quantize mean just lower precision right >> eight bits. Yeah I'm sure it does but how does it do it? I'm sure it's very difficult to understand. Right. Because
[0:35:37] one, it's a training process that goes over a lot of data. And by the way, uh you're doing regression, right? Over the over the data. How many times you go over the data? Before large language models, people would have a lot of images and they would go over the data 20 80 times like that. So many many optimization iterations. Large language models have billions of parameters and billions of training points. What is the balance? Right? Well, the secret of some company
[0:36:10] that I will not mention is to do maybe two passes over the data. Now, so then now it's a little bit easier to say that the training you can see the effects of the training, right? Two or maybe even four. Oh yeah. So, I want to talk about residual connections. Maybe maybe the last thing I want to talk about and then just take questions. So good initialization and layer normalization were not enough to train deep neural networks. It was found that if you have more than
[0:36:44] 20 layers it becomes very almost impossible to train a neural network. You say well don't have 20 neur don't have 20 layers. Why do they have 20 layers? Because it works better if I can do it or 40. Right? So when the network is so deep it cannot be trained the training accuracy and generalization both of them degrade. In fact there is an analysis that says that the initial the gradients actually start resembling white noise.
[0:37:19] If if you want I can explain what that means. So residual networks introduce what is called identity shortcut. I mean like this should be of interest to um people in neuroscience to see if we have any analogies like that in in the biological work. Um and after introducing these residual networks we can use hundreds of layers 200 layer neural network can be optimized and the widening is corrected. So the person who came up with this idea
[0:37:53] of uh residual networks is Kaiming Hay and he says that he came up with the idea using the following thought experiment. So the thought experiment is as following. Suppose that you have a neural network was a smaller neural network. We call it a shallow neural network. Suppose it has 20 layers only. and you train it. Now suppose that after this your network is trained, you put identity box in
[0:38:28] between. You stretch it and put an identity matrix in between. Well, you haven't changed it, right? You just made it deeper. So, it's not going to be worse in terms of accuracy to have this this bigger neural network. But if I try to train a neural network of this size which I did not know it was good it was okay to put identity here I can't do it. So I don't get this I don't I I cannot obtain this result by training that neural network um before these ideas of residuals came because a neural network
[0:39:03] is almost there's zero probability that's going to say all those weights made them identity right is going to do something to them. And so um he says why don't you allow for the possibility of identity mappings all the time in neural networks. So if if if a layer is not needed maybe we can skip it. Uh insert identity mappings as an option. Here we know it's an identity mapping. So how can you insert an
[0:39:35] identity mapping as an option? by this is your neural network and here are two layers. Every two layers put another arc which is the identity arc and this has a weight could be zero or could be one and these have weights but these weights could be zero in which case you do the identity block. So what you do is you put these skip connections every two layers of the neural network. And in fact if what you
[0:40:10] wanted to train the other thing that he was saying is if I want to train the identity function with a deep neural network is an enormous cost and I and I probably want to fail and why should that be right now if I train a residual network uh on the identity function and I started reasonably I want to be able to do that right so this thing has done a huge difference has made a huge difference does anything like this exist in the human brain brain in any animal brain or does any of that reasoning
[0:40:43] apply to that? I mean, I don't know the neuroscientist talking about training training our our neural network or so on, but um I've always found this idea interesting. So, this is what you do. You have a prediction function plus the identity matrix every layer. The pictures that I showed you are precisely that. So this is now a neural network with 20 layers and with 110 layers with skip connections and without skip connections.
[0:41:16] And this was not done by the author of residual networks. It was done by someone else. Um and these are two-dimensional slices. And are they real or not? I don't know. But they're enticing. They're they're kind of interesting. and they go together with this idea that you couldn't train without uh residual connections. Now residual connections are so important that when you look at transformers today transformers there are residual elements between blocks too that idea has sort of propagated into that. So among the thousands of p thousand papers that have been written
[0:41:50] about training neural networks and and um huristics and tricks some of the few ideas that really remain are residual blocks and normalization and is there a more intelligent way of doing normalization? What exactly does normalization do? There actually by the way quite a few papers saying normalization improves things because of that. They're mathematical papers and almost everywhere there's something unsatisfactory there is some assumption and uh residual neural networks make the
[0:42:25] landscape um benign uh softer and in the proof you see something that is not quite there right maybe can only done for a shallow neural network or something. Um, so we have tons of ideas that have been proposed, a few that survive and some that we're missing. I'll skip this thing about shattering of gradients. Something else maybe for a
[0:42:57] neuroscientist, if you just look at the FS, that's a neural network. And what I mean by f is some layers neural network some layers organized in that manner and suppose that I have skip connections I've added skip connections then what happens is that I can visualize this network as being a broader network because according to how I choose the coefficients if I choose them zero or one I could follow this path and not use the skip connections at all or I could
[0:43:33] use one and so one. So what we can see is that there are two to the n implicit paths that I'm really creating by putting a residual network. Um and adding just u a block doubles the number of paths and um here's something that people have found out. If you take a neural network in general if you take a neural network for vision and you truncate weights the the whole thing goes to pieces. the results go to pieces. But if you go to a residual network and remove some of the
[0:44:08] elements after training at inference. So you have a neural network a residual neural network has been trained. Everything is weights and then you go on and make zeros. Some of the weights make them zero arbitrarily. You still get good results because uh there all these paths that are there and there's theory about this orura at Princeton. So here's a picture. VGG is a neural network for vision. If you remove elements then the error becomes very large. You can never do
[0:44:44] anything. And this is the number where in the neural network you drop weights at the beginning or at the end. And with a residual network you have those things and these spikes are of interest but but it doesn't matter. So the second the second question that I would talk to a neuroscientist is that with residual networks I have a more uh healthy and more robust network. That's another interpretation of the many that there are about u residual blocks. Are are there such things in the human
[0:45:19] brain? Uh and this is what you don't want to hear about all this talk about optimization algorithms. I think all I want to put one of the few things I want to do to make this discussion pretty general is this. Neural networks are trained with a variance of the stochastic gradient method. What is a stoastic gradient method? Well, you could take the whole gradient of the objective function and
[0:45:52] go downhill. But the objective function has a million terms. It's a regression, right? So you just sample a few of those as if you're only doing and compute the grain just with respect to those weights and you do the reverse mode of automatic differentiation. You have your neural network you you do one pass and in the backward pass you compute the derivative in in in general there a million functions you do that for a batch of 600 or so on. So you don't get the true gradient, you get an
[0:46:23] approximation to the gradient. And it's stochastic because you choose them in a random way, not in not in a prescribed way. Right? So you choose an approximation to the gradient, you move. How far do you move? There's this question about nonlinearity versus noise. If a function is smooth, you can move a lot. The function changes very rapidly. You have to cut down. So you have to compensate those two with the steplate. Right? So everything starts with the stochastic gradient method which by the way was invented by Robinson Mondro in 1951
[0:46:58] and lay there dead for years and years and uh how did the people in the community of machine learning discover the robins? How did they go and learn? I mean Robin's a very famous mathematician right? Did all sorts of things. How did they find that he invented that method? Well, the way it happens a lot with they discover it and they later realize that's the stoastic gradient method. If you start with a perceptron roen blood saying okay here's my perceptron which is two layer neural network I make a guess and it's wrong. Oh, why don't you move why don't
[0:47:32] you move a little bit this way this way? Why don't you move the little weight that way? Right? And then and then how much? Well, by sensitivity since before you realize it, you're doing something like this and you want to do it at random. So they invented that that back propagation and people realizes Robins Monroe for which there is this beautiful theory um uh part of I described but so the field of optimization for neural networks was static for many years not many advances but that is changing
[0:48:08] so we wrote a paper in 2018 with Leon Bou and Frank Curtis And in that paper we have this picture that we thought is a road map for research in advancing algorithms for training neural networks. You have a stoastic gradient method is like the beginning. It's like Adam and Eve. Everything starts here. And there are two possibilities. One of them is to decrease the noise. Make the make the grain more and more exact. Right? You can always do that and you can do do a
[0:48:40] dynamically sampling algorithm. An algorithm that starts with a very inexact gradient as it progresses it makes it more and more exact. Makes sense. Is that being used in practice? No. Why? Because it doesn't map well with the GPU. You can't be changing things like this. Otherwise, it would be used. But we're stuck with these realities, right? uh it would be good to do a dynamic sampling method but it's not being done and everything is being driven by things like you know what what GPU do I have and uh that's going to be determined the batch size but now when
[0:49:13] we look at algorithms what you can do is you shouldn't just be using the stoastic gradient method the gradient has many components you have a million variables a million components the magnitudes of these quantities are not for real Right. Uh so doing a diagonal scaling uh is going to be imperative. In fact this is what Adam do does in Adrad at least there has to be a diagonal that scales those gradients and they do it with historical information. They see they observe what the optimization has
[0:49:47] done and scales it that way. Now we have ideas for quasi Newton but especially Gaus Newton uh when we have regression problems Gaus Newton methods are usually the way to do you don't work with a hessian you work with a Gaus Newton matrix um because a Gaus Newton matrix is always symmetric and positive definite it only requires first derivatives and the second the hes the second derivative of neural network maybe has curvature that is not interesting So Gaus Newton is an
[0:50:20] important thing. U trying to do variance of Newton and and the natural gradient method are are good. And I will finish here by saying we wrote that paper in 2018 saying well this is the way things could go and to some extent this is what's happening now with development in industry except that we missed one big thing. There is one thing we didn't think about here and therefore our paper should have only gotten a B minus at best. Um, can anybody guess what I missed? What we
[0:50:54] missed? I We missed adaptive gradient. Yeah, that I put in this category here. Diagonal scaling. What that changes over time. Yeah. um nonlinear conjugate gradient quasin newton is better than that bfgs is better than nonlinear conjugate gradient
[0:51:27] and conjug has history so um momentum is more like uh smoothing actually I don't have it I don't have the answer oh yeah structure. All these methods were are designed for general purpose optimization. And the software for instance that we have that is used that the virtue is
[0:52:01] that it's general purpose. So we see with great gratification that our software is being used everywhere psychology blah blah blah right for any function. But a neural network is not any function. It's a composition and for instance has layers. So one of the simpler ideas is you you have the variables in the problem. How about if you update each layer separately and it's like a coordinate descent method where some variables are changed first. Well that's too simple. The other thing is you want to approximate somehow
[0:52:35] the Gaus Newton or um coariance matrix or anything like that. They're enormous. But if they can't be represented as chronicer product then you can have a much smaller representation of a big matrix with a chronicer product and that's what we forgot in here. That's a third dimension that is exploiting structure and the structure that exists there is one that can be exploited with chronic products and maybe other things too and this is this is right now actually where the action is. I mentioned that one of my students won that competition with a
[0:53:08] variant of what's called shampoo. You know, you have to forgive people in deep learning. They always come up with these names, right? The inception network, they're very very good, right? The only really bad word is GPT, right? Why does why isn't it called uh crystal or magic? You know, it's called GPT and what chat GPT, right? So there they they missed it. But otherwise, shampoo, right? So there's a there is a method that has a matrix in front tries to be something like a Newton like uses chronic products uh but still has to be implemented in a
[0:53:43] distributed system where a whole team worked for two years just to implement it and um it's way too complicated but I think now we're converging because they feel like they have to simplify this and we think also we have to simplify that um and I can give you here my secret ideas But what we're going to be doing in terms of simplifying the optimization um the first has to do with one of the things I mentioned at the very beginning. If you have a billion parameters,
[0:54:16] do you really what is the dimension of the space you move in when you optimize? So subspace methods and they're moving in that direction. How do you choose a subspace at random? No. through information of the problem. What information of the problem is there? If you look at the gradient of each layer and organize it as a matrix is low has low rank pretty sure you can use that information to decide on subspaces. The other thing
[0:54:50] is you can use this shampoo which is an extension of these adaptive methods and extract subspace information by doing approximate SVD or power method in there and then you need preconditioners but you need implicit preconditioners nothing nothing that involves um a direct solve but something like SSR preconditioning where you use it method uh on some systems a subspace and in that subspace to do some preconditioning. So now we have the iterative algorithm and inside of that
[0:55:24] there's a sub's another iterative algorithm. Um and and now the question is to get the balance of all all those operations correctly. But uh some of the experiments show that you can do fine-tuning and decrease the memory size um enormously by doing subspace minimization. And I think that um doing uh neural network for the masses is really important and make it try to make it accessible for the masses. Thank you. I'll finish there. >> She said I don't have a question.
[0:56:10] >> Yes. like to train from network that allows you to do that with limited data to get a better result. >> So the question is that in some context you don't have enough data as opposed to all what I discussed here where you have tons of data. Is there something that you can do in order to train things this way? No. And in fact, I wonder if you
[0:56:43] should be using a neural network. Have you tried using random forests or other >> structured networks define exactly how there are networks? >> Oh, okay. I'm not sure if a neural network is the most conducive in that setting, but we don't know, right? So we don't know if we got to the Indies or or we are in there but is somehow this feeling that artificial neural networks are probably like human neural networks that you have
[0:57:15] to b train give it in you know several passes over the data even kids who learn words but they have to be exposed to those words right uh I don't know if it's a vague idea but I would try random forests Um so my question is about the um about S SG and the uh the SGD and the learning rate how there's this sort of
[0:57:49] factor between creating descent and the variance. I wonder if um there is in some context in which it's actually good to have the noise and the variance for example able to escape saddle points and so on and um is this something that like I guess this is sort of to a lot of the things they talk about in terms of architecture um but if you imagine like you got it updated you don't have to be like one batch everything you think this is
[0:58:22] Yeah, the question is uh in SGD you have a trade-off between noise and decreasing the objective function um and you want to suppress it. Could couldn't it be good to actually use noise as a regularizer maybe to get you to the right solutions, right? And I I believe so. I believe so. But that's the part of the picture where I had the picture of the white minimizing the sharp minimizer that became controversial because in our paper we said if you allow noise a significant amount of noise you're going to get to the white minimizer and people have not agreed with that. Right? So um
[0:58:56] to what degree is noise useful? I think it is. Um and uh neural networks you can work with neural networks that are not that big. So you can start uh decreasing the the noise. We never got good generalization results by suppressing the noise too much. This is some years ago and I'm going to look up if you send me an email I'll look up a paper maybe the most recent paper that has looked at those issues. Now there's a lot of talk about this
[0:59:30] implicit regularization and uh where is some good mathematical theory other than hunches and and so on right that's been problematic it's been difficult um people say if you have a linear regression problem that doesn't have a unique solution what do you want to find well the minimum norm solution right what methods will get there now SGD will get there other methods will not right but it's not linear regression So once it's not there, you cannot prove it and um it's not not satisfying to say
[1:00:05] that because it worked for linear regression. And Dave, you had something >> whether the order in which the data is presented to the network, what role that plays in order for a big deal. This thing about processing data is something that usually doesn't get published. You don't know whether it's being done. Traditionally, there's something that was called curriculum learning that Benj used to uh propose a long time ago saying give the easiest
[1:00:39] examples first and then the hardest examples. And I think that idea was abandoned some time ago. I do not know um what is being done. Uh processing the data is is so important. cleaning the data and so on. I have another another one of my former students is a co-author of GPT4 and he works on that uh gening data selecting data using data and I never get any information from him. So that's more or less my answer about
[1:01:12] about data. They want to talk to me about optimization and that's it. Um now one point about data talking to Leono too and I know Jan Leon has the same idea is that people talk a lot about fairness and there's a separate field fairness and so on and some of us are very skeptical about this. How can be be a field called fairness um in economics you have social welfare but there's no field in economics called social welfare because it's um application specific. If you have tax
[1:01:46] policy, then you try to decide what's a fair tax policy and there you're going to spend all day and not agreeing, right? But you come up with one solution and then you do something else. um uh broadband uh opening broadband and how do you charge and who get social welfare too what is good for society right is contextbased and um Microsoft and I think meta both of them close their fairness groups and merge them with a core group because
[1:02:19] some of us feel that bias is bias I mean if you catalog people incorrectly and say that I am a monkey I get upset but if you get bacteria and you you um they don't get upset, right? But it's in some sense the same thing. Uh and so with with respect to data, Yan Leon and Libo feel that most of what they have seen about unfairness can be solved by looking at by going and just uh improving the data. But I know this is uh I know many people will not agree with me because the whole
[1:02:52] conference is about fairness. Um privacy. Are those separately? >> Those are separately. Algorithmic people talk about algorithmic fairness very seriously. Um and and what do they mean? That people buy a program in order to hire employees, right? And you look at some characteristics from that you make inference and it has these errors, right? And people get upset, discriminated against someone, right? That's what that's what they mean. you
[1:03:25] know, and we're going to be using um AI more and more for automatic decisions like that. How do we make sure that we don't have um we're making things worse and making the word maybe more more efficient but more unfair, right? Because uh human intervention has been our common sense is go away from there, right? >> Exactly. >> They're trying to put government regulation I mean, I was I was looking at a pre LLM and a company
[1:04:00] uh and they they told we're going to show you some results, but by the way, we haven't done all this cleaning that there is to do putting rules saying you cannot say this. There's some things just hardcoded, right? So I start looking at the output like chat GPT output and it's completely full of fourletter words and I think it's a people some people like this the way they write um but so I mean some things you can sort of prescribe
[1:04:33] but what about the case of the black Nazi? You read about this right? uh generative AI from Google when they released uh Gemini, you can create images. You can say create an image of a carpenter working inside the Hancock building, right? Who knows? Try to do a good thing. But uh if you say carpenter, you shouldn't assume that all the carpenters are men. So someone starts saying that you know among professions, let's not start trying to reproduce all biases. every category has to, you know,
[1:05:07] and so someone writes there um create a picture of a Nazi and there comes a black Nazi um because you wanted to bear fair among all categories, right? So by being fair now you you worse, right? And if you put rules on the side, not in in the system, it reminds us of our old AI um expert systems and knowledge based engineering. talk to people, you find lots of rules and with that you will create a good architect or something like that, right? You create so many
[1:05:40] rules and they come uh clash against each other, they're not enough and so on and so forth. So putting in putting fairness rules outside of the system which academies would do saying oh this has to be uniform among this group or whatever, right? Why that group, right? Why why black Nazis doesn't go together? Right? So if you try to impose that it's going to be a problem. So I mean I don't know what you what you think but if you say create a picture of an electrician something like that and a man comes out that's sort of the right thing right um
[1:06:15] and I've met very few female electricians right so that um how do you how do you factor that in are you going to put it all there or you just going to use the machine learning uh philosophy which is just take all the data in the world and see what happens when you get electrician, right? Instead of you trying to impose those rules. We got a little bit off topic, but it's it's important because many faculty members say they want to work on fairness in many different areas. And if it's true that it's not really a u an intellectually sound concept, then maybe
[1:06:51] you can save I mean it sounds good, but um maybe we can save some work. I was a little bit scary saying that you know the machine learning approach is just put more data and uh yeah LLMs have an expert that gives examples 200,000 examples are given to the system about this is the way you ask questions and so on but it's very little compared to the bulk but the bulk is just take all the information that is out there and it's been working with with some rules like your
[1:07:25] vocabulary very uh have the impression from the way you're going through this that machine learning developed initially for classification problems and now it's through prediction and do you think which seems to me like very >> she's saying I believe that Machine learning was developed initially for
[1:07:57] classification and now it's being used for prediction. That's the first part of your question, right? >> Yeah. No, I don't think so. I think was >> it started wondering if it would be like we get to the same. It's a philosophical >> I think it was always prediction. >> It's always prediction. It's a way of thinking that we applied mathematicians were not
[1:08:31] used to do and it started with Google for instance a Google search engine. When you ask you do a query it doesn't tell you what the result is. It gives you thousand examples with certain probability. Right? So it's predicting. Now it's gone beyond. So we do image recognition. What you do is the neural network the last layer may have 10,000 nodes corresponding to 10,000 classes. Is this a car? Blah blah blah. Right? And it gives you the probability of each one of them. It's always been a
[1:09:04] prediction system. Now large language models are prediction of what the next word is. That's what it does. And if you let it going, it says keeps predicting, but it's it's still prediction. It's probabilities and so on. And um I mean I was an optimizer. People press a button. Here's a here here's how you design a wing of an airplane, right? It doesn't give you all this all these pro uh possibilities. I think it's pretty interesting. You know, since you work on climate models,
[1:09:39] I spent 10 years working on the weather forecasting system for DVAR. I mean, it's not known because I only wrote one paper for 10 years with ECMWF. We were working on on um 4DVAR which uh requires optimization in the loop very similar to this back propagation and so on and I came with my mindset of deterministic optimization you know you have a Navier Stokes equation you want to find out what the initial conditions are you do the forecast and you get the predictions right and then you know the more I saw about this they're spending more and
[1:10:12] more money uh def defining the coariance matrices um in in the objective function um this is statistics problem like um the interaction between variables and so on. So now I have this weather prediction system and I have machine learning prediction systems and they have so many similarities large scale there's uncertainty blah blah blah derivatives it works in the world of real numbers and so on and the only difference is that one of them is
[1:10:44] an embedded physical model and a sto equations the other one has a bunch of neurons right um a collection of neurons and no understanding of of computer vision. But but structurally mathematically there are many there are many similarities in these two prediction systems right and also when you get a forecast there's not one there's a whole bunch of prediction systems ACMWF will do like 10 and then people will select something uh and with
[1:11:18] hurricanes it's one of the few places where people are given results like that uh many people statistician say why why aren't we doing this all the time only for hurricanes they tell you And maybe here or here is the level of uncertainty. And on other things in everyday life where we know there's uncertainty, we do not display that and we don't make that effort of displaying it. Right? So if someone asked me to solve an optimization problem and I know that the data is not completely wellnown then I should say well give me the distribution of some of the things that are pretty unknown and let's find a set of solutions.
[1:11:55] I skip certainly not an expert expert but if I look at like the connetos that are coming down people that are trying to actually look at what rates seems like there's a lot more skills you know to sort of random things that jump across there there certainly are layers but and that's sort of the main structure but there's a lot more of the other types >> so the question is Why are we looking at more and more layers in the brain? There are more things like skip connections.
[1:12:28] Um I would just say because it works for for them, right? Are there good works on similarities between artificial neural networks and real neural networks? Uh >> it's just a bunch of papers showing why. >> But so these question like skip connections they exist in the brain. Mary when you ask about what does it do
[1:13:06] classification of predictions when people say why do neural networks well work well if you talk to like the founders of the current field they they they will say they're very good at learning representations So that's what they do. Um, you get an image based on pixels. You're not going to make predictions based on pixels. Are you going to make a prediction based on mouths and contours and shapes and yes, those are better
[1:13:41] representation, right? And every layer of the neural network is creating a different representation. And then the last one if you started the last one it says here's the data that's the way you should represent it like the basis in which you should represent it and now do a prediction right and so having lots of layers do you really need lots of layers in order to get the that representation correct right I mean our common sense is why would you need 200 right but I have no idea Yeah. Are we still online or
[1:14:40] Oh, I'm still here. >> Okay. So, the question is that I talked about removing connections. When you have a skip connection architecture, that is you remove some arc, some weights, you still good um predictions. Do you have any intuition about why that works? No. Other than the one I I said that um there are many paths and you've created a much more powerful network. Other than that, I would not know what to say. And um I can give you a paper again one of those that does nice math and not complete story. Um but again it
[1:15:17] starts counting the probability that each one of them will have the right um well I I can show you I can show you that paper. No I don't have I don't I don't have intu intuition.
